Whole genome sequencing of the RNA genomes allows us to identify the existence of a virus and analyse it to identify its ancestry. In bioinformatics, the process of arranging DNA/RNA or protein sequences in order to find similarities between them and infer their structural, functional, and evolutionary links is known as sequence alignment or sequence comparison. The Needleman-Wunsch Algorithm, created in 1970 by Saul B. Needleman and Christian D. Wunsch, is a methodical technique to sequence alignment. It is a dynamic programming approach for effective sequence alignment that divides the issue into smaller, independent subproblems that are then tackled one at a time. The global sequence alignment algorithm is described, and it is used to align protein or nucleotide sequences. The serial nature of this algorithm's CPU-based implementation makes it less efficient in terms of temporal complexity. Moreover, the expensive expense of high dimensional matrices for longer strings renders the serial solution ineffective. Although it has been demonstrated that heuristic tools like FASTA and BLAST run 40 times quicker than the serial CPU implementation, their outputs are still simply approximations of the ideal answer. Moreover, utilising the Markov decision theory has memory issues, fixed cycle lengths, and state-transition probabilities. It makes sense to look at parallel algorithms given the growing demand for techniques that can handle more sequences and the enormous computing power offered by parallel and cluster networks. In order to increase the speed and effectiveness of the sequence alignment process, we will employ the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm in conjunction with parallel programming techniques in this project. Performance criteria such as time complexity, speedup, processors used, sequence length, total cost, thread chunk size, and matrix dimensions will be taken into consideration when evaluating the performance of the suggested strategy.
